---
title: 'Statistical properties in hyperbolic dynamics, part 4'
date: 2019-06-09
permalink: /posts/2019/06/blog-post-9/
tags:
  - probability theory

  - measure theory

  - limit laws

  - dynamical systems

  - hyperbolic dynamics

  - transfer operator
---

This is the fourth and last post of a series of 4 posts based on the lectures at the [Houston Summer School on Dynamical Systems 2019](https://www.math.uh.edu/dynamics/school/school2019/) on Statistical properties in hyperbolic dynamics, given by Matthew Nicol, Andrew Török and William Ott. These notes are heavily edited with added comments, examples and explanations. Any mistake is of my responsibility. Some of the notation has been changed for consistency.

## Lecture 4

In the previous three lectures we introduced several methods for studying statistical properties of dynamical systems, such as martingale approximation or quasi-compactness. In this lecture, we are interested in the case of non-autonomous (non-stationary) dynamical systems. We will limit our discussion to the discrete time case. A motivation to consider this kind of systems is to model dynamics which evolve in time, or that we have no certainty of being stationary. This includes systems such as billiards with moving scatterers (heavy particles dynamics), or open systems such systems of genes producing proteins which signal processes that influence back the genes.

Suppose we have a family of dynamics $\\{ f_i\\}$ on the same probability space $(X,m)$. In general the transformations $f_i$ will not preserve the measure $m$ and will **not** exist any measure which is invariant for all transformations. We will assume that the transformations are non-singular with respect to $m$.

In the previous posts, we defined the correlation function for a single transformation: let $T\colon X\to X$ be a non-singular transformation of the probability space $(X,m)$. For observables $\phi,\psi\colon X\to\mathbb{R}$, define their correlation function by

$$
C_{\phi,\psi}(n) = \int_X \phi\cdot \psi\circ T^n dm - \int_X \phi dm \int_X\psi dm.
$$

Our first goal is to define a notion analogue to the one of decay of correlations for our non-autonomous setting. In the autonomous case, it is possible to prove a stronger property than decay of correlations: for every pair of observables $\phi,\psi$ with equal expectation,

$$
| P^n(\phi) - P^n(\psi) |_{L^1} \to 0
$$

as $n\to\infty$. Note that this implies decay of correlations:

$$
\| \int_X \phi\cdot \psi\circ T^n dm - \int_X \phi dm \int_X\psi dm \| = \| \int_X P^n(\phi)\cdot\psi dm - \int_X P^n(\phi) \mathbf{1}m(\psi) dm \| 
$$
