---
title: 'Law of large numbers'
date: 2019-05-21
permalink: /posts/2019/05/blog-post-10/
tags:
  - probability theory

  - measure theory

  - limit laws

  - borel-cantelli

  - law of large numbers
---

In the last entry, we discussed the Borel-Cantelli lemma, a zero-one law that for limpsups of sets. With this we can deduce a first law of large numbers under some assumptions for the higher moments of our random variables. Later on we will prove a version which does not assume the existence of the higher order moments.

Recall from the [first entry](posts/2019/05/blog-post-4/) on the series that we are interested in studying the behavior of the averages of iid sequences: for an iid sequence $\{ X_n\}$, define the sums $S_n = X_1 + \dots + X_n$ and consider the sequence of averages $S_n/n$. The weak law of large numbers provided convergence in distribution to the mean of the sequence, $\mu = \mathbb{E}(X_1)$. The strong law of larges describes the almost sure behavior of the averages. For the proof we give here, we will assume that the sequence $\{ X_n\}$ has finite $4$-th moments.




Suppose that $A_1,\dots$ is a sequence of events in $\Omega$. We define its limsup as the sets

$$
\limsup_n A_n = \bigcap_{n=1}^\infty \bigcup_{k=n}^\infty A_n.
$$

In other words, $\limsup A_n$ can be thought as the set of points $\omega\in\Omega$ belonging to infinitely many of the sets $A_n$. The Borel-Cantelli lemma gives us conditions for when the limsup of the sequence has either full measure or zero measure.

**Theorem (Borel-Cantelli):** Suppose that

$$
\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \mathbb{P}(A_n) \lt \infty .
$$


Then

$$
\mathbb{P}\left(\limsup_{n} A_n \right) = 0.
$$

**Proof:** Note that

$$
\mathbb{P}\left(\bigcap_{n=1}^{\infty} \bigcup_{k=n}^{\infty} A_{k}\right)  = \lim_{n \to \infty} \mathbb{P}\left(\bigcup_{k=n}^{\infty} A_{k}\right)
\leq \lim_{n \to \infty} \sum_{m=n}^{\infty} \mathbb{P}(A_m) = 0
$$

since $\sum_n \mathbb{P}(A_n) < \infty$. This proves the statement $\square$.

The converse is not true in general: consider in $[0,1]$ with the usual Borel structure, and the sets $A_n = [0,\frac{1}{n}]$, with corresponding probabilities $\mathbb{P}(A_n) = \frac{1}{n}$. The limsup of the sequence is \{$0$\}, which has probability zero, while the sum of the probabilities is infinte.

## Second Borel-Cantelli lemma

The second Borel-Cantelli lemma provides a partial converse: if the events \{$A_n$\} are independent, then the converse is true.

**Theorem (Borel-Cantelli)** Suppose that the sequence \{$A_n$\} is independent and

$$
\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \mathbb{P}(A_n) = \infty .
$$

Then

$$
\mathbb{P}\left(\limsup_{n} A_n \right) = 1.
$$

**Proof:**

We will prove that

$$\mathbb{P}\left(\limsup_{n} A_n \right)^c = 0.$$

Note that

$$
\mathbb{P}\left(\limsup_{n} A_n \right)^c = \sum{n=1}^\infty\mathbb{P} \left(\bigcup_{k=n}^\infty A_k \right)^c.
$$

But

$$
\mathbb{P} \left(\bigcup_{k=n}^\infty A_k \right)^c \leq \mathbb{P}\left(\bigcap_{k=n}^\infty A_n^c \right) = \lim_{N \to \infty} \mathbb{P}\left(\bigcap_{k=n}^{N} A_{k}^{c}\right) = \lim_{N \to \infty} \prod_{k=n}^{N} \mathbb{P}\left(A_{k}^{c}\right)
$$

$$= \lim_{N \to \infty} \prod_{k=n}^{N} (1-\mathbb{P}(A_{k})) \leq \lim_{N \to \infty} \prod_{k=n}^{N} \exp(-\mathbb{P}(A_n)) = \lim_{N \to \infty} \exp(-\sum_{k=n}^{N}\mathbb{P}(A_n) )  = 0.
$$

Here we used that for $x\geq 0$, $1-x \leq \exp(-x)$ $\square$.
