---
title: 'A probabilistic approach to intermittency'
date: 2019-09-01
permalink: /posts/2019/07/blog-post-14/
tags:
  - probability theory

  - measure theory

  - limit laws

  - dynamical systems

---

In this entry, we will discuss some of [Carlangerlo Liverani's](https://www.mat.uniroma2.it/~liverani/) work. Without any doubt, his work *Decay of Correlations, Annals of Mathematics, 142, pp. 239-301, (1995)* is one of the most influential of his publications, but this time we will focus on his work with [Sandro Vaienti](http://www.cpt.univ-mrs.fr/~vaienti/) and [Benoit Saussol](http://www.math.univ-brest.fr/perso/benoit.saussol/), *A Probabilistic Approach to Intermittency, Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, 19, pp. 671--685 (1999)*. We will refer to this paper as LSV99.

In previous entries (see [here](posts/2019/05/blog-post-5/]), [here](posts/2019/05/blog-post-8/])) we have seen how uniform hyperbolicity yields good spectral properties for the transfer operator associated to a dynamical system. Under general assumptions, the transfer operator acts on a suitable Banach space of functions with spectral gap, that is, the spectrum of the operator consists of a maximal real simple eigenvalue, and the rest of the spectrum is contained in a disk of radius strictly smaller than the length of the maximal eigenvalue. This has several dynamical consequences: existence of absolutely continuous invariant probability measures, exponential mixing (and hence ergodicity) of such measures, decay of correlations, among others properties. For the case of intermittent maps (or in general, non-uniformly hyperbolic maps), the transfer operator does not posses such properties, that is, there is an absence of spectral gap. Thus, the spectral techniques are not available.

We start by defining the class of maps that we will study: the Liverani-Saussol-Vaienti (LSV) maps are defined by

$$
T_{\alpha}(x)=\left\{\begin{array}{ll}{x\left(1+2^{\alpha} x^{\alpha}\right)} & {\text { if } x \in[0,1 / 2]} \\ {2 x-1} & {\text { if } x \in(1 / 2,1]}\end{array}\right.
$$

$$
L =
  \begin{cases}
    (0 + 1) & if $P = \mathit{NP}$ \\
    \phi        & otherwise
  \end{cases}
$$

for $\alpha\in (0,1)$. All of the maps of this family have an indifferent fixed point, that is, $(T^n_\alpha)'(0) = 0$ for all $\alpha$ and $n\geq 1$. We will denote by $m$ the Lebesgue measure on $X = [0,1]$. If we identify the points $0$ and $1$ it is clear that the maps $T_\alpha$ become continuous.

It is easy to see that this measure is **not** invariant under any of these transformations. One of the insights of LSV99 is using the theory of invariant cones to address several of the ergodic questions. First we recall the definition of the transfer operator: for a fixed transformation $T_\alpha$, its transfer operator $P\colon L^1(m)\to L^1(m)$ is defined as the dual of the composition operator $U\colon L^\infty(m)\to L^\infty(m)$ given by $Uf(x) = f\circ T_\alpha(x)$ for $f\in L^\infty(m)$. The duality relation is given by

$$
\int_X Pf g dm = \int_X f Ug dm
$$

for all $f\in L^1(m)$ and $L^\infty(m)$. The transfer operator can also be understood as the operator giving the density of the push-forward measure of an absolutely continuous measure under the dynamics, that is, if $d\mu_f = f dm$ then $d(T_\*(\mu_f)) = P(f)dm$ where $T_\*(\nu)(A) = \nu(T^{-1}(A))$. Finally, an explicit expression for the transfer operator (with respect to the reference measure $m$) can be given:

$$
Pf(x) = \sum_{Ty = x} \dfrac{f(y)}{T'(y)}.
$$

This expression allows us to perform concrete calculations and estimates. One of the main features of LSV99 is the use of invariant cones (this has been done before for instance in *Decay of Correlations, Annals of Mathematics, 142, pp. 239-301, (1995)* by Liverani). We define then the cones:

Let $\mathcal{C}_0 = \\{ f \in C^0((0,1])) \ \| \ f \geq 0 , f \text{ is decreasing}  \\}$. The transfer operator preserves $\mathcal{C}_0$ as it is a positive operator.

**Theorem**

$$
\varphi(\lambda) = \log \mathbb{E}e^{\lambda X_1} \lt \infty
$$

for all $\lambda\in\mathbb{R}$.

**Theorem (Cramer):** Let $S\_n = X\_1 + \dots + X\_n$ and $x > \mu$. Then

$$
\lim_{n\to\infty}\dfrac{1}{n} \log \mathbb{P}\{ S_n \geq nx\} = -\varphi^*(x),
$$

where $\varphi^\*$ is the Legendre transform of $\varphi$.

Recall that the Legendre transform of $\varphi$ is given by

$$
\varphi^*(x) = \sup_{\lambda\in\mathbb{R}} \{\lambda x -\varphi(\lambda) \}.
$$

We will prove the theorem in two parts: first the upper bound, which uses a standard Chernoff bound technique, then the lower bound, which uses a measure tilting argument.

**Proof:** (Upper bound). For $\lambda \geq 0$, we have by Markov's inequality

$$
\mathbb{P}\{ S_n \geq nx \} = \mathbb{P}\{ e^{\lambda S_n} \geq e^{\lambda nx} \} \leq e^{-\lambda nx} \mathbb{E}(e^{\lambda S_n}).
$$

This implies that

$$
\dfrac{1}{n} \log \mathbb{P}\{\frac{1}{n} S_{n} \geq x\} \leq -\lambda  x +  \dfrac{1}{n} \log \mathbb{E}(e^{\lambda S_n}) = -\lambda x  + \varphi(\lambda)
$$

and consequently,

$$
\limsup_{n \to \infty} \dfrac{1}{n} \log \mathbb{P}\{\frac{1}{n} S_{n} \geq x\} \leq - \sup_{\lambda\geq 0}\{ \lambda x  -\varphi(\lambda) \}.
$$

By Hölder's inequality, $\varphi$ is convex with $\varphi'(0) = \mu < x$. Then the expression in the brackets is negative for for $\lambda < 0$, and so we can take the supremum over all real $\lambda$.

(Lower bound). Fix $\epsilon > 0$. We will change the law of the random variables $X$ so that the event $\\{ S\_n \geq nx \\}$ is not rare under the new law, and we can use the old limit laws on it. If $P$ is the law of $X$, consider the new law $Q$ given by

$$
dQ(X) = e^{-\varphi(\lambda)+ \lambda X} dP(X).
$$

Then we have that for iid $X_1,\dots,X_n$,

$$
d\mathbb{Q} = dQ\otimes \dots \otimes dQ = e^{-n\varphi(X)+\lambda S_n}d\mathbb{P}(X_1,\dots,X_n).
$$

Note now that

$$
\varphi'(\lambda) = e^{-\varphi(\lambda)}\mathbb{E}(Xe^{\lambda X}) = \mathbb{E}_Q(X).
$$

If $\mu < x < \operatorname{esssup}X $, we can find $\lambda_\*$ such that $\varphi'(\lambda_\*) = x + \frac{\epsilon}{2}$. This implies that

$$
\mathbb{Q}\{ x + \epsilon > \dfrac{1}{n}S_n \geq x \} \to 1,
$$

as $\mathbb{E}_Q(X) = x + \frac{\epsilon}{2}$. With this we can see that

$$
\begin{align}
\liminf_{n\to\infty} \dfrac{1}{n}\log \mathbb{P}\{\frac{1}{n} S_{n} \geq x\} \geq \liminf_{n\to\infty} \dfrac{1}{n}\log \mathbb{P}\{x + \frac{\epsilon}{2} \frac{1}{n} S_{n} \geq x\}\nonumber \\
 = \liminf_{n\to\infty} \dfrac{1}{n}\log \mathbb{E}_{\mathbb{Q}}( e^{-n\varphi(\lambda) - \lambda S_n} 1\{  x + \frac{\epsilon}{2} \frac{1}{n} S_{n} \geq x \}  ) \nonumber \\
 \geq \varphi(\lambda) - \lambda(x+\epsilon) + \liminf_{n\to\infty} \dfrac{1}{n}\log\mathbb{Q}\{ x + \epsilon > \dfrac{1}{n}S_n \geq x \}\nonumber \\
 = \varphi(\lambda) - \lambda(x+\epsilon) \nonumber \\
 \geq -\varphi^* (x+\epsilon)
\end{align}
$$

from which the result follows from letting $\epsilon \to 0$.
